+++
title = "Managing Asthma in Pregnancy (MAP) trial: FENO levels and childhood asthma"
date = 2018-12-01
authors = ["M Morten", "A Collison", "VE Murphy", "D Barker", "C Oldmeadow", "J Attia", "J Meredith", "H Powell", "PD Robinson", "PD Sly", "PG Gibson", "J Mattes"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "Background: The single-center double-blind, randomized controlled Managing Asthma in Pregnancy (MAP) trial in Newcastle, Australia, compared a treatment algorithm using the fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) in combination with asthma symptoms (FENO group) against a treatment algorithm using clinical symptoms only (clinical group) in pregnant asthmatic women (Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry, no. 12607000561482). The primary outcome was a 50% reduction in asthma exacerbations during pregnancy in the FENO group. However, the effect of FENO-guided management on the development of asthma in the offspring is unknown. Objective: We sought to investigate the effect of FENO-guided asthma management during pregnancy on asthma incidence in childhood. Methods: A total of 179 mothers consented to participate in the Growing into Asthma (GIA) double-blind follow-up study with the primary aim to determine the effect of FENO-guided asthma management on childhood asthma incidence. Results: A total of 140 children (78%) were followed up at 4 to 6 years of age. FENO-guided as compared to symptoms-only approach significantly reduced doctor-diagnosed asthma (25.9% vs 43.2%; odds ratio [OR], 0.46, 95% CI, 0.22-0.96; P =.04). Furthermore, frequent wheeze (OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.09-0.87; P =.03), use of short-acting β-agonists (OR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.25-0.97; P =.04), and emergency department visits for asthma (OR, 0.17; 95% CI, 0.04-0.76; P =.02) in the past 12 months were less common in children born to mothers from the FENO group. Doctor-diagnosed asthma was associated with common risk alleles for early onset asthma at gene locus 17q21 (P =.01 for rs8069176; P =.03 for rs8076131), and higher airways resistance (P =.02) and FENO levels (P =.03). A causal mediation analysis suggested natural indirect effects of FENO-guided asthma management on childhood asthma through “any use” and “time to first change in dose” of inhaled corticosteroids during the MAP trial (OR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.59-0.99, and OR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.70-1.03, respectively). Conclusions: FENO-guided asthma management during pregnancy prevented doctor-diagnosed asthma in the offspring at preschool age, in part mediated through changes in use and dosing of inhaled corticosteroids during the MAP trial."
featured = false
publication = "*Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology*"
doi = "10.1016/j.jaci.2018.02.039"
+++

