+++
title = "Effect of unintended pregnancy on skilled antenatal care uptake in Bangladesh: analysis of national survey data"
date = 2020-09-01
authors = ["MN Khan", "ML Harris", "C Oldmeadow", "D Loxton"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "© 2020 The Author(s). Background: Around 48% of all pregnancies in low- and middle-income countries are unintended. Unintended pregnancy may contribute to lower use of antenatal care (ANC); however, current research in the area is largely inconclusive due to the methodological approaches applied. Methods: Responses from 4493 women extracted from the 2014 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS) were used to assess the association between unintended pregnancy and subsequent uptake of at least one and at least four skilled ANC visits. For this, Bayesian multilevel logistic regression models with informative priors (representing a range of values within which the researcher is certain the true effect of the parameters included lies) were used, adjusting for other factors that affect ANC uptake. Informative priors were selected from the BDHS data collected in 2004, 2007, and 2011. Results: Around 64% of women in Bangladesh who had at least one pregnancy within 3 years prior to the survey (that ended in a live birth) received ANC at least once, and of these around 32% used ANC at least four times. Mistimed (aOR, 0.73, 95% Cred I, 0.66-0.81) and unwanted (aOR, 0.69, 95% Cred I, 0.64-0.75) pregnancy were associated with reduced odds of attending the recommended minimum of four skilled ANC visits compared with wanted pregnancy. These likelihoods were even lower for at least one skilled ANC visit among women with a mistimed (aOR, 0.59, 95% Cred I, 0.53-0.65) or an unwanted pregnancy (aOR, 0.67, 95% Cred I, 0.61-0.74) than women with a wanted pregnancy. Conclusions: In Bangladesh, more than one-quarter of women who report an unintended pregnancy at conception and do not terminate the pregnancy are at high risk of not using ANC. It is important for policies to include women with unintended pregnancy in mainstream healthcare services. This will increase the use of ANC and reduce associated adverse consequences."
featured = false
publication = "*Archives of Public Health*"
doi = "10.1186/s13690-020-00468-1"
+++

