+++
title = "A multi-center randomized controlled trial to reduce unmet needs, depression, and anxiety among hematological cancer patients and their support persons"
date = 2020-05-01
authors = ["W Stevenson", "J Bryant", "R Watson", "R Sanson-Fisher", "C Oldmeadow", "F Henskens", "C Brown", "S Ramanathan", "C Tiley", "A Enjeti", "J Guest", "F Tzelepis", "C Paul", "C D’Este"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "© 2019, © 2019 Taylor  &  Francis Group, LLC. Purpose: Individuals diagnosed with a high-grade hematological malignancy are at high risk for psychosocial distress. This study aimed to examine the effectiveness of a web-based information tool and nurse delivered telephone support in reducing: (i) unmet information needs; (ii) depression; and (iii) anxiety, among hematological cancer patients and their support persons (SPs). Methods: Patients with a new diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Burkitt lymphoma, or lymphoblastic lymphoma and their SPs were enrolled in a prospective multi-site randomized trial. Participants received either access to an online information tool and telephone support from a hematology nurse, or usual care. Outcome data were collected 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks post-recruitment. The primary endpoint was unmet information needs. Results: Data from 60 patients and 15 SPs were included in the analysis. There were no statistically significant differences in unmet information needs, depression or anxiety between intervention and control groups for patients. Patients in both groups demonstrated a decrease in information needs over the intervention period. Post hoc analyses revealed that patients who did not achieve remission with the first cycle of treatment experienced increased anxiety from 4 weeks until the end of the study (p = 0.008). Conclusions: A web-based information tool and nurse delivered telephone support did not reduce unmet information needs, depression or anxiety among hematological cancer patients, however this finding is inconclusive given the low power of the study. Implications for Psychosocial Providers or Policy: Patients who do not achieve remission are at high risk of anxiety, and may benefit from targeted psychological intervention."
featured = false
publication = "*Journal of Psychosocial Oncology*"
doi = "10.1080/07347332.2019.1692991"
+++

