+++
title = "Scale-up of the Physical Activity 4 Everyone (PA4E1) intervention in secondary schools: 24-month implementation and cost outcomes from a cluster randomised controlled trial"
date = 2021-12-01
authors = ["R Sutherland", "E Campbell", "M McLaughlin", "N Nathan", "L Wolfenden", "DR Lubans", "PJ Morgan", "K Gillham", "C Oldmeadow", "A Searles", "P Reeves", "M Williams", "N Evans", "A Bailey", "J Boyer", "C Lecathelinais", "L Davies", "T McKenzie", "K Robertson", "J Wiggers"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "Background: Physical Activity 4 Everyone (PA4E1) is an evidence-based program effective at increasing adolescent physical activity (PA) and improving weight status. This study aimed to determine a) the effectiveness of an adapted implementation intervention to scale-up PA4E1 at 24-month follow-up, b) fidelity and reach, and c) the cost and cost-effectiveness of the implementation support intervention. Methods: A cluster randomised controlled trial using a type III hybrid implementation-effectiveness design in 49 lower socio-economic secondary schools, randomised to a program (n = 24) or control group (n = 25). An adapted implementation intervention consisting of seven strategies was developed to support schools to implement PA4E1 over 24-months. The primary outcome was the proportion of schools implementing at least four of the 7 PA practices, assessed via computer assisted telephone interviews (CATI) with Head Physical Education Teachers. Secondary outcomes included the mean number of PA practices implemented, fidelity and reach, cost and cost-effectiveness. Logistic regression models assessed program effects. Results: At baseline, no schools implemented four of the 7 PA practices. At 24-months, significantly more schools in the program group (16/23, 69.6%) implemented at least four of the 7 PA practices than the control group (0/25, 0%) (p < 0.001). At 24-months, program schools were implementing an average of 3.6 more practices than control schools (4.1 (1.7) vs. 0.5 (0.8), respectively) (P < 0.001). Fidelity and reach of the implementation intervention were high (> 75%). The total cost of the program was $415,112 AUD (2018) ($17,296 per school; $117.30 per student). Conclusions: The adapted implementation intervention provides policy makers and researchers with an effective and potentially cost-effective model for scaling-up the delivery of PA4E1 in secondary schools. Further assessment of sustainability is warranted. Trial registration: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN12617000681358 prospectively registered 12th May 2017."
featured = false
publication = "*International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity*"
doi = "10.1186/s12966-021-01206-8"
+++

